# CAD Software: Motivation

> Diamond cannot be built near-term because it requires too many DOFs. Simulations suggesting otherwise suffer from a lack of peer review. Theorists fell into a rabbit hole, with few other researchers having comparable technical skill in the relevant quantum chemistry tools. We must educate more people in how to conduct high quality simulations of free radical chemistry.

Preliminary theoretical studies revealed several probable characteristics of Phases IV&ndash;VI. Published simulations of diamondoid mechanosynthesis ([mechanosynthetic-build-sequences](https://github.com/philipturner/mechanosynthetic-build-sequences)) suffer from major flaws. In May&ndash;June 2025, these flaws were discovered and fixed. The new reaction trees are quite elaborate, and not yet published or peer reviewed.

> Update: reaction trees are [published in this repo](../SiC%20Build%20Sequences/README.md).

The process for initiating the first SiC cage on a clean SiC(111)/Si(111) build plate was okay. The issue came from extending this cage to multiple crystal unit cells. Existing build sequences did not properly account for quantum tunneling of hydrogens. They did not treat the carbene and silene as resonant equilibrium states, as in the MinToolset paper. The solution was to transform a deposited SiH<sub>3</sub> group into a SiH: diradical, in a two-step manner. Then, transform a deposited CH<sub>3</sub> group into a CH<sub>2</sub>· monoradical. The silicon and carbon atoms deterministically bond, forming a 6-membered ring in mid-air. The silicon ends up as a monoradical site.

The improved build sequences revealed that, [for multiple reasons](https://gist.github.com/philipturner/d9b02836d65e63c0bd875c6fbbc4cc7f), organotin tripods might be needed. Organotins suffer from multiple practical issues. They are oxygen-sensitive, so the linkers must be thiol groups. Charging with SiH<sub>3</sub> feedstocks requires first removing H from a Sn-H precursor, then flowing a hydrosilane gas species over the Sn· monoradicals. Tributyltin hydride is acutely toxic, so synthetic chemists are justifiably scared to work with similar compounds. <b>We have concerningly low confidence that organotin tripods can be synthesized and charged with SiH<sub>3</sub> feedstocks.</b> If this is the case, mechanosynthesis cannot produce 3D crystal lattices.

> Observations from the recent investigation: It will be years until SiC is confirmed in experiment, and the author doesn't want to wait that long to have fun. Look at how people handled radioactive substances when engineering nuclear energy.

It would be constructive for other people to reproduce Philip’s research, and arrive at a consensus on the reliability of required chemical processes. Specifically, upgrade from 0 Kelvin reaction paths to finite temperature simulations that correctly model statistical mechanics and bulk lattice distortions. In addition, Phases V&ndash;VI deserve more detailed elucidation at the molecular mechanics level of theory. Particularly with regard to minimum atom count, basic mechanics, and reliability. <b>We have concerningly low confidence in the 1e-6 to 1e-15 error rate required for massively parallel open-loop control.</b>